[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hey, there.
It's getting hot
in here, and that
must mean that summer
season is around the corner.
And so in this
episode, we're going
to talk about the
characteristics of summer
no matter where you
are in the world
and how those same
characteristics are mirrored
in our mind and
body this season.
You better believe I've
also got a balancing
mantra for summer season that
I'm going to share with you.
And then I've brought along
a few mind body balancing
summer recipes to cool, calm,
and tantalize your taste buds.
And so what are the
qualities of summer?
Well, I think we can all agree
that summer is the hottest
time of the year, and
so that quality of heat
is something we really
need to be aware of
and pay attention to.
It also brings a
level of intensity
and a sharpness that can
show up in our bodies
and in our interactions
with each other.
Summer is one of the
most active times
of the year in the natural
world and also with us,
so there's this
energy of movement.
And then there's also
a lightness to summer,
which we can feel and which
actually shows up in the fact
that we get the most
hours of actual daylight
during this season.
And so what kind of imbalances
are we seeing during the summer
season?
Well, the heat--
as the temperatures
start to rise, so do tempers.
And so things like
anger, and aggravation,
and even impatience are on the
rise during the summer season.
Other heat-related
issues that we
can experience during
this time of year
are things like inflammation.
Skin issues can start to
rear their ugly heads--
so things like
acne, skin rashes,
and, of course,
bites and stings.
And we're also seeing
things like infection,
diarrhea, reflux, and acidity.
And so my Ayurvedic balancing
mantra for summertime
is simple.
It's cooling, calming,
moderation, and flow.
So cooling is going
to be a quality
that, as you would
imagine, is going
to offset some of that heat.
Calming is a way of stepping
back from some of the intensity
that we may be feeling
or that we may be
drawn into this time of year.
Moderation, well,
that's a way of letting
go of any draw towards excess--
anything excessive.
And then there's flow.
We've all heard the
term, go with the flow.
Well, flow is about
letting go of intensity
and this my way or
the highway thinking
and finding a way of infusing
a sense of ease in our approach
to life and living.
And what kinds of
foods are we going
to want to be choosing
this time of year
in order to support
us living this mantra?
Well, the simple
taste that we're
going to be looking
for in the summertime
are sweet, bitter,
and astringent.
So the sweet taste
we're going to find
in some of these
gorgeous fruits that
are around this time of year--
stone fruits, melons, grapes.
We'll also find a sweet
taste in juicy vegetables
like cucumbers and in
creamy, grounding vegetables
like avocados, beets,
and sweet potatoes.
The sweet taste is cooling
and it's a little bit heavy,
and so that's going to help to
calm things down, bring us back
to center, and have
us feeling grounded.
The other taste we really
want to go for is bitter.
The bitter taste can
be found in things
like leafy greens
and fresh herbs,
so we're going to want
to make sure to include
a lot of those in our
diet at this time of year.
The bitter taste is also
cooling, but it's clarifying
and it's got some
antiseptic qualities, which
are going to help us
with that inflammation
that I mentioned earlier
and that infection.
And then, lastly, we're
going for astringent.
So astringency is a little
bit more like an experience
than it is a taste, right?
It's an experience of drying.
And so we're going to
find the astringency
in things like raw foods--
raw fruits and
vegetables apples,
pears, beans, and lentils--
as well as some of those spices
that I mentioned earlier.
And so next, we'll take a look
at some of my favorite summer
recipes that feature some
of these lovely ingredients
to give you a sense for how
to incorporate their balance
and goodness into your
mind, body, and life.
So let's kick things
off with breakfast.
And breakfast
couldn't be easier,
especially in the summer.
What we've got access to in the
summer is some amazing fruits--
stone fruits, and plums,
and figs, and pears,
gorgeous things.
And so what we decided
to do for breakfast here,
incredibly simple.
We're just roasting
these fruits just
to make them easier
for the digestion,
and we've mixed them
with some spices that
are going to help
bring out the flavor,
but also help with
that digestive process.
So all I've done is gone
to my local farmer's market
and picked up some of the
best of the fruit on offer.
So that's things like plums,
nectarines, pears, and apples.
The idea is to pick up
whatever looks good.
And then we cut that
fruit up really easily,
pop it onto a tray, and
then maybe drizzle it
with just a little bit of ghee--
can leave the ghee
out if you like--
and then just sprinkle
a little bit of spices.
I've got here cinnamon, I've got
a little bit of fennel powder,
and a teensy bit of cardamom.
It's as simple as that.
Roast that fruit until it
starts to release its juices,
and then it's ready to eat.
This dish could not be simpler.
As you can see here, I've
roasted this fruit in the oven,
and it's looking
beautifully juicy.
All we gotta do is put
some of that into a bowl.
You can grab some
of your favorites.
Another thing that you can add
to this, just to up the cooling
factor, is a little
bit of yogurt,
though I would typically
choose a coconut yogurt
in the summer over any of
the other types of yogurt.
And then, lastly, if you
are interested in adding
a little bit of
texture, I would highly
recommend you throw in
maybe some toasted grains.
Nuts are going to be a
little heating for summer,
but it's a great time of
year to make use of seeds.
And so pumpkin seeds are
a great choice for summer.
And I always like to top this
with just a few pumpkin seeds
for flavor and a gorgeous color.
There you are, a simple,
roasted, spiced fruit
breakfast.
Next, we're going to
feature an ingredient that
has become almost
synonymous with the summer,
and that is watermelon.
Watermelon is
cooling, it's juicy,
and that cool heaviness has
a bit of a grounding effect.
I know, personally,
watermelon is
one of my absolute favorite
of the summer fruits,
and it brings back a lot
of memories from childhood.
And so we are putting together
a gorgeous watermelon, lime,
and rosewater--
I mentioned back before that
rose is a beautiful spice
or flavor to incorporate
into your summer recipes,
and this is an incredibly
easy way to do it.
And so all we need
to do is we're
going to take some
watermelon that we'd cut up--
super easy-- and we just want
to add that to a blender.
This one is going to
be great for the kids,
especially if they're
outdoors playing
and they want a nice, beautiful
thing to cool them down.
To that, we're going to
add a little bit of lime.
So lime is actually
one of the most
cooling of the citrus fruits.
Citrus fruits tend to
be a little bit heating,
but lime is one of the most
cooling of the citrus fruit,
so it's a great one to
use in the summertime.
And the flavor, again, is
like a reminder of summer.
And then there's that
secret ingredient
that I mentioned
before, rosewater.
Just a little bit of
rosewater will do the trick,
and it'll bring
through just a hint
of that lovely, rose flavor.
All we want to do is just
add a little bit of water,
blend that up.
[WHIRRING]
And so there you have it.
It's just that simple.
A beautiful summer
melon cooler--
watermelon, lime, and rosewater.
And so this last dish is an
incredibly versatile dish
that makes for a
terrific light lunch.
It can also make a
great snack to share
with some friends or
family or, coupled
with a few extra
greens, a lovely dinner.
It features, as I
mentioned before,
one of the ingredients that
has that beautiful stringent
quality that's great
for summer, beans.
And for this dish,
we're including
some lovely white beans.
So this one is a white bean dip.
It also features some
lovely, fresh coriander,
some beautiful mint, and one
of my secret ingredients,
roasted garlic-- a simple
way to really up the flavor
on a really easy dish like this.
Putting it together
could not be simpler.
All you need to do
is add the beans
to a processor or a blender.
I'm going to throw in
a couple of squeezes
of my favorite summer
citrus, which is lime.
A few coriander leaves.
It's going to add some
lovely zing and freshness.
Just a little bit of mint.
Mint's actually quite
potent, so we just
want to add a
little bit of that.
Squeeze in some of that
luscious, roasted garlic.
We'll add a little
bit of olive oil
and a couple of pinches
of salt. And now
is when we give it a blend.
[WHIRRING]
And so as I mentioned, this
is incredibly versatile.
And one of my favorite
ways of having this
is as a really
simple, light dinner.
So a throw in just a few
gorgeous little greens here
in a bowl, and I'm
just going to spoon
some of this luscious dip.
And you can just spoon
some of this luscious dip
into the bowl or a
plate, and accompany
that with some
beautiful, fresh bread.
There you are.
[MUSIC PLAYING]